> Contributed by **Sachintha Senarath** 
> 
> MBBS Year V, BMedSc (Hons) Student
> 
> Email ssen37 at student dot monash dot edu

## Heart

The heart is a muscular organ responsible for pumping blood to the rest of the
body via the circulatory system. The heart is divided into four main chambers -
the right atrium, right ventricle, left atrium and left ventricle. The right
atrium and ventricle are collectively referred to as the right heart, and the
left atrium and ventricle as the left heart. The right atrium receives
deoxygenated blood from the systemic veins and the right ventricle then pumps it
into the pulmonary arteries to be oxygenated in the lungs. Oxygenated blood then
returns to the left atrium via the pulmonary veins and then flows into the left
ventricle which pumps it into the systemic circulation via the aorta.

![Heart](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e5/Diagram_of_the_human_heart_%28cropped%29.svg)

> Wapcaplet. CC BY-SA 3.0

## Systole

The period of contraction (squeezing) of the heart muscle that causes the
ejection of blood. Systole can be specified into atrial systole and ventricular
systole as they occur at different times. However, typically, the term of
systole refers to contraction of the ventricles and thereby the ejection of
blood into the systemic and pulmonary circulations.

## Diastole

The period of relaxation of the heart muscle which allows the chambers to fill
with blood. As with systole, diastole can also be specified into atrial and
ventricular diastole. When unspecified, it refers to the latter.

## Cardiac cycle

The performance of the heart from the beginning of one heartbeat to the
beginning of the next.
 
The cycle is regulated and initiated by the action potentials generated by the
sinus node, located in the lateral wall of the right atrium of the heart. The
sinus node is a collection of cells which have the unique feature of spontaneous
action potential generation.
 
The cardiac cycle can be split into two main stages – systole and diastole. Each
stage can be further subdivided:

1. **(Ventricular) diastole**:
   - Isovolumic relaxation – the ventricular muscles relax to rapidly decrease
     pressures within the ventricles.
   - Filling phase – the decrease in ventricular pressures allows the ventricles
     to fill with blood returning from the pulmonary or systemic veins.
   - Atrial systole – The last period of ventricular diastole is marked by
     atrial systole, otherwise known as the atrial pump, which ejects blood from
     the atria into the ventricles. 80% of the ventricular blood volume is
     filled during the filling phase, and the atrial pump contributes a further
     20%.
2. **(Ventricular) systole** :
   - Isovolumic contraction - the ventricular muscles begin contraction to force
     the atrio-ventricular valves closed (which were open during diastole) but
     the semilunar valves (aortic and pulmonary valves) remain closed until the
     contraction of muscles build up sufficient pressure to open them.
   - Ventricular ejection - when the ventricular pressures rise sufficiently
     high enough to open the semilunar valves, blood is ejected from the
     ventricles into the systemic and pulmonary circulations. About 70% of the
     blood empties in the first third of this period of ejection (period of
     rapid ejection) and the remaining 30% in the last two thirds (period of
     slow ejection).

![](https://openstax.org/resources/d7c0faaef1c387aea7c6d93f416a269d646f8c99)

> OpenStax College - Anatomy & Physiology, Connexions Website. http://cnx.org/content/col11496/1.6/, Jun 19, 2013. CC BY 3.0.

Useful link - TeachMeAnatomy page on the Cardiac Cycle - [https://teachmephysiology.com/cardiovascular-system/cardiac-cycle-2/cardiac-cycle/](https://teachmephysiology.com/cardiovascular-system/cardiac-cycle-2/cardiac-cycle/)

## End diastolic volume

The volume of blood in the left and/or right ventricle at the end of diastole
(i.e. just prior to systole, when the heart contracts). The EDV signifies the
maximum volume of blood contained within the ventricles throughout any phase of
the cardiac cycle.

## End systolic volume

The volume of blood remaining in the left and/or right ventricular at the end of
systole.

## Ejection fraction

The fraction of the end-diastolic volume that is ejected is called the ejection
fraction - usually equal to about 60%.

## Heart rate

The number of times the heart contracts (beats) every minute. The heart rate is
thus expressed in beats per minute (bpm).

## Stroke volume

The volume of blood ejected from the heart in one contraction (beat). The stroke
volume does NOT equal the total volume of blood in the heart just prior to
contraction (end-diastolic volume), as only about two-thirds of this volume is
ejected with one beat.

## Cardiac output

The product of the heart rate (HR) and stroke volume (SV) and thus is defined as
the volume of blood pumped by the heart in one minute.

